# mtkcam - MediaTek Camera kernel module repository

## WHAT IT DOES?

This repository places out-of-tree MediaTek camera kernel modules.
The folder structure is listed below:

```bash
mtkcam/
├── include/
├── camsys/
│   ├── isp7_1/
│   ├── isp7s/
│   ├── isp7sp/
│   ├── remoteproc/
│   ├── rpmsg/
│   └── common/
├── imgsensor/
│   ├── src-v4l2/
│   └── inc/
├── mtk-aie/
├── mtk-dpe/
├── mtk-hcp/
├── mtk-ipesys-me/
├── mtk-mae/
├── ccusys/
├── scpsys/
└── sched/
```

### include

The `include` subdirectory places the public kernel header files that
are used by kernel modules in the `mtkcam` directory.

### camsys

The `camsys` subdirectory contains ISP7.x kernel module implementations
from ISP7.1 to ISP7sp.

We opt to support Linux kernel version within the same ISP kernel module
 implementation by using the macro
`LINUX_VERSION_CODE` defined in `linux/version.h`.

### imgsensor
_TODO: need documentation contribution..._

### mtk-aie
_TODO: need documentation contribution..._

### mtk-dpe
_TODO: need documentation contribution..._

### mtk-hcp
_TODO: need documentation contribution..._

### mtk-ipesys-me
_TODO: need documentation contribution..._

### mtk-mae
The `mtk-mae` subdirectory contains kernel modules which support MAE.
mtk_mae.ko is common part of kernel modules and the platform change is implemented
in mtk_mae_isp*.ko.

### ccusys
For mt6989 & subsequent platforms, mtk_ccuv.ko generated by mtkcam/ccusys/ is used.
For mt6897 & previous platforms, mtk_ccu.ko generated by drivers/remoteproc/ is used.

### scpsys
The `scpsys` subdirectory contains kernel modules which need to communicate with SCP,
such as mtk_aov.ko.

The mtk_aov.ko do the following jobs:
1. Data transferring between AOV stream in APMCU userspace and AOV SCP MW in SCP.
2. MTK FD notification for AOV and MTK camera concurrency scenario.
3. APU MTEE processing for AOV FR feature.

We opt to support Linux kernel version within the same ISP kernel module
 implementation by using the macro
`LINUX_VERSION_CODE` defined in `linux/version.h`.

### sched
We opt to support different Linux kernel version APIs within the same C2PS kernel module
 implementation by using the macro
`LINUX_VERSION_CODE` defined in `linux/version.h`.

## HOW IT WAS BUILT?

[Kleaf](https://android.googlesource.com/kernel/build/+/refs/heads/master/kleaf/README.md), which is a new build flow, only supports kernel version from 6.1.
And it has been launched in the mgk_64_k61 at first.

### MGK (Mediatek Generic Kernel) build command

Same as before:

```bash
source build/envsetup.sh
export OUT_DIR=out_krn
lunch {project name}-{build variant}
make -j<number of simultaneous jobs> krn_images
```

#### Example - MGK build

{project name} is `krn_mgk_64_k61`, {build variant} is `userdebug` and
\<number of simultaneous jobs\> is `16`:

```bash
source build/envsetup.sh
export OUT_DIR=out_krn
lunch krn_mgk_64_k61-userdebug
make -j16 krn_images
```

### Standalone build command

The fundamental command is

```bash
 cd kernel
 ./tools/bazel build <options> <build setting> //{package name}:{target name}
```

#### Example - camsys standalone build

- \<options\> are `--verbose_failures --sandbox_debug`
- \<build setting\> is `--//build/bazel_mgk_rules:kernel_version=6.1`
- {pacakge name} is `vendor/mediatek/kernel_modules/mtkcam/camsys`
- {target name} is `camsys.6.1.userdebug`

```bash
cd kernel
./tools/bazel build --verbose_failures --sandbox_debug --//build/bazel_mgk_rules:kernel_version=6.1 //vendor/mediatek/kernel_modules/mtkcam/camsys:camsys.6.1.userdebug
```

The mtkcam kernel modules should be put into the `/vendor/lib/modules` folder.

## HOW TO USE IT?

mtkcam kernel modules provide Linux kernel user-space API in the
`device/mediatek/common/kernel-headers` folder.
